[Music]
this is
this is an unusual science event for us
because
the audience has been studying
this subject right this is really
unusual where the entire audience is
well aware
of what we're talking about and
everybody here is a student
and there's a seat in front and i'm i'm
i just tested negative so
you can be completely assured i tested
negative yesterday
as well um so sid
i actually you you've written very
eloquently and very powerfully and very
influentially
about kovid 19 and the new yorker
in cell in your own venues
and i actually want to ask you
more anecdotally because this is
something we're living through in the
same way that everyone has a 911 story
where were you what did it mean to you
how long before it diffused away
i want to ask you anecdotally what your
experience
personally has been of this time
well there's been a medical experience
there's been a scientific experience and
there it has been a personal experience
so
it's best to divide them up in sort of
three angles obviously because
that's exceptional that you've had the
medical experience in the scientific
experience
so the medical experience let's talk
about that first i mean i'm a cancer
physician
cancer patients are particularly
susceptible because they're
immunocompromised i
um i don't want to say i was prescient
about the plague
but in i think it was in february or
maybe in january
i went to a bar mitzvah and
mark lipsich the epidemiologist
who's written a lot about the harvard
epidemiologist who's written a lot about
covert
um is a common friend and someone came
up to me
and there were no masks we were in a
synagogue somewhere february
yeah and someone came up to me a friend
of mine came up to me and said
mark lipstick says that it's going to be
really
really bad and i said add
12 is to that because
because um because there was a sense
i think within our community because we
had already started hearing
about some of the most the words you
don't want to hear
words like asymptomatic carrier
those are airborne airborne it's not a
good you don't want you want to hear
aerosol airborne asymptomatic carrier
you don't want to hear a word called are
not equals
2.3 right which you don't want infection
right the infection rate
you don't hear a case fatality rate of
in some populations of
one percent those are words you don't
want to hear
right and those words had already begun
to appear in the press and so i said add
about
10 more release to that this is in
january
so the medical experience of this was
that as you know in new york
um there was a time in at columbia
because we were up at you know we're up
in
the um up in washington heights there
was a time
when the icu beds were so
full that the bone marrow
transplantation units became
we i'm a transplanter i'm an oncologist
and as an oncologist i know
how to manage a
crashing patient
this is part of what you learn as a
transplant physician
and we pride ourselves in never sending
patients to the icu
because we run our own icu
and so there was the experience of of
running an icu
outside the icu because we had patients
all over so that was the medical
experience of covid
and the fear and the constant
surveillance
that we had to do this was a time before
the tests were available
we were using clinical diagnosis we were
asking people
you know can you smell cheese i mean
that was the level
at which you know we that was it's the
timeline that kind of amazes me
because the cdc was well aware of
kovid in december right
why weren't we told to wear
masks it's not like we haven't had past
pandemics
i mean i was march 15th i was still
planning
the next day to try to fly to costa rica
for a holiday right and and
i was going to take my my daughter and
my 13 year old had more sense than i did
where she was like we're not going to
costa rica mom
and that's march so what happens between
december and march that nobody's telling
us to wear masks
so i mean i'll give you a little bit of
the timeline many people know the
timeline
so towards the end of january the first
patient as far as we know they probably
is not patient zero i don't believe in
patient zeros although i believe
in the stories of patient zeros
so if patients are a patient arise from
a
30-odd hour flight from wuhan into
skonomish county in
washington state near seattle
with signs of a pneumonia
and he's doing badly so
he gets hospitalized um and
if you want to hear if if you want a
minute by minute
day by day expose
i would strongly suggest you read the
new yorker piece that i wrote on
on on that it's called what covet
teaches us about american medicine
i'm not going to go through the whole
piece now so it's online it's
it's free
then something very bad happened
things or two or three things are
very very bad happened and we want to
talk about them because we need to
not have them happen again the first
thing that happened that was very very
bad
was that um
[Music]
people in washington in in at uw
one of the university of washington one
of the preeminent universities
in the world have a pathology department
and it's run by a virologist named alex
greninger who i spoke with
and i've had long series of
communications with
greninger figured out that this was
covered
among other people he was not the first
person to figure it out and he said
you know testing for a virus in the
nasopharynx oropharynx
is not so hard to do viruses have
sequences
rna dna doesn't matter in this case it
happens to be rna
you can test for it the trouble was
that the cdc was also making kits
to test for covid and they had started
making those kits
in january while they knew about the
infection in wuhan
but the problem was that the cdc kits
didn't work
there was a missing component the first
batch worked
and then there was a batch problem and
we can talk about quest in the q a
session what a batch problem means
but there was a batch problem and so the
cdc said
hold on let's fix our kit
before we give what's called an
emergency use
authorization for other testing kits
so 42 days passed
that's a lot of days 42 days is an
eternity
for a virus where you can infect three
people a day
right that's they are not factors
42 days i mean i you know this is an
absurd calculation
in 42 days if you multiply an r
naught with 42 by the number of 42
you'll cover the entire population
exponential it's an exponent right so
you'll cover the entire population of
earth multiplied by many times
42 days passed between the detection of
the first
case in
as i said snohomish county in
washington before the cdc
opened an authorization kit to test for
covid
that's mistake one
mistake two was that and it continues to
be the case
mistake two was we have a picture of a
man wearing a mask
behind us this is from the 1918
the plague's past exactly
yes we can talk about we should
definitely talk about plagues past
because it seems so insanely obscure
yeah and yet but in those 42 days
we knew that frontline healthcare
workers
nurses and long-term residents of
nursing homes
could be protected by n95 masks
and we knew that those masks various
masks were made in china
as well which was hit and and so
that became so so
there was a supply chain problem and
that supply chain problem
amplified so in fact we now know that
even simpler masks would have worked
but certainly n95s would have worked
and there was a supply chain problem
because we had no supply chain
anymore in the united states of n95
masks
our emergency supply was depleted
and we didn't know how to decontaminate
them well can
can we talk about simpler masks because
i'm actually curious about this
um so i have a simpler mask i don't wear
an n95 mask
i have lots of scissors i was at our
local over here san pedro a little plug
for some pedro
at the end of the block and they have
this beautiful hand sanitizer and i put
the hand sanders on and i could smell it
with my mask on and i thought does that
mean my mask is not working
like the fact that i can smell the
sanitizer
does that mean i'm not protected from
there so
i'm sorry i i i promise i will not
toot my horn but there was an earlier
article
that came out before the first one the
second one
again in the new yorker where i said
that in
for every respiratory virus that we know
there is a concept of a viral inoculum
in other words whether you get infected
by a virus or not
or a bacterium or not is not a binary
phenomenon
it depends on the amount of virus that
you get infected by and we can talk
about it in great
detail yeah and as you remember
there's a famous theory that there's a
famous swiss cheese theory
right so the swiss cheese theory is that
um you can imagine every barrier
to to a any event
as a series of slices of swiss cheese
right so if all this
if all the holes in the swiss cheese are
perfectly aligned
then you can go right through but if
one hole if one every piece of swiss
cheese
has holes in it in other words every
mechanism of protection social
distancing
masking isolation quarantine and even
medicines vaccination
etc etc each one is a barrier
with a percentage attached to it of
protection
that percentage is not a hundred percent
there is no
and there's unlikely to be a hundred
percent protection
for any and all of these things hand
sanitization
so what happens is that you get an
infection
when there is a straight line through
the swiss cheese
masks are one part of that swiss cheese
and no
scientist has ever claimed aside from
these
n95s which are really highly protective
no scientist has ever claimed that
they're 100 effective
but a 50 effective mask is better than a
zero percent effective nothing
and if two people are wearing it and if
two people are wearing it then you
multiply that 50
right so can i can i just uh
redirect for a second because i really
want to ask you about the science of it
yeah and um first of all
there are basic things like what is a
virus
is it alive and what does it want
[Laughter]
it's a very strange beast a virus yeah
so we can talk about viruses in general
and we can talk about corona viruses
yeah viruses in general or right so
because viruses
are are not alive by the conventional
definition of life they cannot
independently
reproduce themselves they are
typically a dna or
rna and they typically have a coat
and the coat is typically made of lipids
or fats
and proteins and they can be a
combination of them or they can be one
or the other
they infect cells which are alive but
that's the only way they can reproduce
and then periodically co-opt they
parasitize or co-opt or
acquire this the capacity of the cell to
reproduce
and they make copies of themselves so
they may need to make
two kinds of copies and that's important
or two
kinds of molecules to make copies they
need to make a copy of their
dna or rna depending on what kind of
virus it is
and they may need to make some way of
making the coat
around the virus and then they bud out
of the cell
in doing so they often kill the cell
and we can talk about why or how and
then they go on
and infect so one cell can produce a
thousand virus
or virions and then they go and produce
more
and those go and produce more cells and
this process super strange beast
because unlike bacteria right so a lot
of the common misconception is why don't
we just give antibiotics it's because
it's not a bacteria
that's right it's a virus which is a
different entity altogether
but bacteria are alive in the
conventional sense
that's right bacteria can reproduce
independently or
they don't require the cell to reproduce
there's some
minor exceptions to this which live on
the edges of
of of the bacterial world but that said
viruses
are unique in the capacity that they
cannot have
they don't have the capacity to produce
by themselves they
rely or they parasitize the cells
apparatus reproduce
and in doing so they kill the cell or
they incite
an immune response that ultimately kills
the cell i mean isn't it a strange
phenomenon that there is this thing
called a virus which is not alive in the
conventional sense there are not that
many examples of such a thing and not
that well in fact
even the word virulent right it's
derivative of virus but that they're so
aggressive it's actually probably the
other way around probably the word
virulent came first and the virus virus
but all of that said um in fact viruses
are extraordinarily common
um most of them don't infect humans
do we know how many viruses are in the
animal kingdom there are
thousands most of them infect bacteria
a lot of them infect bacteria they are
bacterial viruses right
bacteria are very good at fighting
viruses they're very good fighting
viruses
we can talk about that in a second but
they infect viruses
but a fraction of them infect humans so
there's like
let's say i mean i've heard numbers
between 250 000 and like
more than 1.5 million viruses in the
animal kingdom
that's right so there are many many many
and in fact they're not strange
beasts at all if you think about it i
mean if you
were thinking about it in purely
evolutionary terms
right it's a profound way of conserving
energy
you don't have to build your own
mitochondria
you don't have to build anything you
just
go inside it's like it's um you know
it's
it's you just go inside someone else's
house
um you know sleep on their furniture
make copies of yourself and
and out you go and in the process of
course you destroy the house but that's
a different story
but it's it's an extraordinarily
efficient way
so in fact i would i would twist the
question around and ask the question
why aren't there more viruses
and we don't know the answer part of the
answer is that we
have lived as a as
living beings i'm not talking about
humans humans are just a little blip in
other animals animals chickens just
animals
bacteria plants everything
living beings have lived so long with
viruses
that in fact we even learned to either
have a symbiotic relationship with them
or fight them and so the question really
is
not why aren't there so many viruses
the question is why aren't there only
viruses
right because viruses are
extraordinarily efficient ways
of of reproducing their own kind so one
of the fascinating
aspects of um recent
pandemics and we should also talk about
past pandemics
is the zoonotic aspect the fact that
it's crossing the species barrier and if
you
run through you know there was obviously
spanish flu
bubonic plague some of these
catastrophes but
if you run through the most recent ones
ebola hiv
staggering hiv 32 million people died
from hiv that's staggering and also we
should talk sociopolitically about why
that pandemic was was took 40 years to
resolve
because of probably the populations that
were targeted by it
most most conspicuously um mers
right the am i saying it right am i
pronouncing it yeah the
middle eastern um respiratory syndrome
sars which is covid1
yup right um and now here we are at
basic covid19 is also called sarskovit
ii
and this these are recent pandemics of
this
this century right and um
and yet why is this one so different the
others have staggering
statistics upsetting statistics but
nothing
like with the exception of hiv but it
was also a 40-year
pandemic um none of them with the
statistics that we have now well
i told you what what the particularly
bad characteristics of this virus
are and we need to talk about them so
one of them is
this which actually shares with hiv
is the idea of the asymptomatic carrier
the asymptomatic carrier is a very very
particular beast that this virus has and
other viruses some viruses have not all
viruses do
ebola for instance really doesn't for
the most part
it's almost 40 or 50 percent fatality
right
that's right so so even if it was 28 000
people
which is a much smaller number that
contracted it in the most recent
pandemic but still
half of them die that's right so it's
pretty devastating it's
it's it has a very high case fatality
rate
which is a terrible thing but it has a
very low
asymptomatic carrier rate and so it
allow what
what happens with ebola just to contrast
ebola and
cyrus cove too is that ebola you detect
in patches
so you suddenly see a patch of people
who get the virus
you can contain them you can isolate
them you can treat them now with new new
antivirals and antibodies and
and then you know that you've contained
the pandemic
with cyrus cove two the two or three
problems number one
is this asymptomatic carrier problem and
you know
um if you are a fan of the
new york times podcast which the daily
daily yes thank you there is a
really really interesting interview
of a german female physician whose name
i'm blanking on of course
who talks about the first case
and she begins to understand that this
is a case of an
asymptomatic or potentially
pre-symptomatic patient
who could infect others you see
that is a big deal because if you're
asymptomatic and pre-symptomatic
and you can infect others that makes a
huge difference and it made a huge
difference
in the case of hiv there are many there
were many
and continue to be many people who are
asymptomatic
or pre-symptomatic who will eventually
develop the disease or may not develop
the disease
but who can transmit the virus and that
is a particular
achilles heel that this virus exploits
the second one of course is the level of
infectivity
so in the universe of infectivity
again to remind ourselves hiv is not
actually a very infective virus
you need to do it's not airborne it's
not airborne you have to do
quite a lot to get yourself
infected by hiv you have to have a
relatively high viral load in the donor
you have to have a breakage of the blood
barrier
in some way or the other which is
complicated as you know
and then you get an infection right here
you have
a virus where you don't need to have any
breakage of any barrier this is airborne
and so and the infectivity rate you
could get much more easily infected
that combination is
is unique there are other viruses that
have that combination so i'll give you a
couple of examples
measles is a virus
where you have a very very high
infectivity rate
actually higher than cyrus cove two
you generally don't have presymptomatic
patients but there
are some sort of quasi-pre-symptomatic
patients
and measles spreads rapidly across
populations
the difference between measles and this
virus
is that generally speaking aside from
certain people
measles is not fatal now measles is an
example
of a successful vaccination program yes
polio smallpox measles
first of all i want to give you a forum
to
say something about anti-vaxxers
because it's not that vaccines are
benign they are dangerous
if they're new but but the anti-vaxxers
with polio
smallpox measles these are things that
have been eradicated
nearly globally because
of vaccines so i would love to hear your
opinion on that well you know i
where does one begin um
look i think in this case i mean let's
talk about specifics i mean anti-vaxxers
are anti-vaxxers
um they're more common than you think oh
i know i know them very well i mean
as i said i mean we're going to talk
about the at the end um i'm on the
governor's commission for um
it's a 15-member panel to to
reopen new york and anti-vaxxers is a
major concern um
we have only 15 members we meet every
week maybe
every day and we have
a very detailed discussion about what's
going to happen next
um and how to manage next steps
anti-vaxxers are a major concern now
all i would say is that
new the vaccines that we're trying
to accelerate for um
covid for sarskoff ii are new kinds of
vaccines
now had we had a vaccine for soros cove
one
which was nowhere near as as as
infectious
yes much lower numbers so no that
vaccine program was halted
it was halted because it stopped
spreading it was contagious
it was contained and it was a different
it was it had actually a different
kinetics as a virus it was contained and
it it really should have been continued
had it been developed would we have a
leg up with this yeah we would certainly
have a leg up with this virus
um but anyway that was contained and and
the vaccine program that was just 2002
2004.
that's right so that was contained and
should have had
and same with mers should have had a
continuous
sort of low burn or maybe high burn
program
i want to remind you janna we were
talking about this a little bit before
um people often forget this vaccination
is a
mathematical game and
vaccines only work in a
what i call a goldilocks spot the gold
and it's very
very important to remember this in the
public domain
by the goldilocks what i mean the
following when the
if if an epidemic or a pandemic is
contained
then the attack rate becomes so low
in other words the number of people
getting infected become so low
that it becomes very hard to run a phase
three
trial of a vaccine does everyone
understand that
because if you only get five people
infected in the
vaccinated group and
three people in the unvaccinated group
you will never reach statistical
significance so it's good news and bad
news it's good news and bad news
goodness it's not spreading very rapidly
bad news
is that you can't test the vaccine
that's right so that's the easy part
the hard part is that if the attack rate
is very high
and many many many people get infected
and you develop natural immunity
so-called herd immunity against the
virus
once again you can't test the vaccine
because everyone is already immunized
they've been immunized by getting
infection sadly so
testing a vaccine isn't easy because you
have to be
in this what i call and i've written
about it you have to be in this
goldilocks spot
where you have the attack rate exactly
high enough
that you can get a difference between
people who are vaccinated
and people who are given the placebo so
putting aside
not putting them aside but but having
already noted
the incredibly successful examples of
vaccinations like polio and smallpox
and measles my flu vaccination doesn't
work very well
right my flu vaccinations would a little
over 50
effective and each year it it has to be
different
isn't h1n1 in fact swine flu part of
the flu vaccination now is that right
because it's not so
um i'm sorry i'm going to get a little
geeky i love geeky you kidding
i mean come on people we get so geeky
here this is this is it
this is this is cool nerdism this is
what we like
right so influenza
i'm a so what you might not know is
i'm a virologist really by training
you're a virologist an internist an
oncologist
historian they all come together
but so flu is a very particular virus
and if you want to know the details you
have you should know the details because
you get the flu vaccine
so flu is an rna virus and it has a very
very bizarre structure which is that it
has
nine independent pieces of rna
independent and that's very important so
it's called a segmented genome
i can tell you this because i failed my
virology test because i didn't know this
um that's a class but now i know
it has a segmented genome most viruses
don't have segmented genomes cyrus cov2
does not have a segmented genome
okay so flu has a segmented genome which
is like saying it has
nine pairs of socks or nine socks
in it when a
flu virus infects a pig in let's say
china
or india or tennessee or wherever it
might infect
and if it happens to be that two flues
infect the same cell they can do
something called
they can mix and match so
h1 n1 and h5n5
infect the same cell and out pops
h1 and 5. because it's segmented
because they can mix and match like
socks
the problem with that is that once
because they can mix and match like
socks
h1n5 has never been seen by the human
population
right because it's a completely new
recombinant
influenza virus and that's what makes
some flues extraordinarily virulent
because you've never no one has ever
seen such a virus
before yeah why sorry cove ii
sarskoff ii does not have a segmented
genome
it has a single genome thankfully and
therefore has no capacity
to make new recombinants of itself
that's point number one and sorry i have
to still continue to geek
but it's important hiv
to in contrast has a has a
separate trick up its sleeve hiv
has what's called an error-prone
replicase
i'm sorry about the words i'll explain
them in a second what hiv does is that
when it makes copies of itself
it makes errors in those copies and so
it
because it makes errors in those copies
it can mutate very quickly
and because it mutates very quickly it
can become resistant to medicines very
quickly sars does not
it doesn't have it has a replicase but
it is not that error prone
so in fact this is not a bad
virus it's not like the flu it's
containable
it's containable so it won't be like
every year there's a
new effort to find exactly it's not like
the flu shot because it is mostly it has
mutations
there have been mutations that have been
detected but so far
they have been few and far in number
it's not like so as i said hiv has one
trick up its sleeve
sars sorry the um influenza has
a completely second trick up in sleeve
but cyrus cov2 has
one incredible trick up its sleeve
and that's something to watch out for
and it's not been covered in the media
and you should know about it which is
it's a most well part of it which is
that we're still discovering
its tricks sars cov2's trick
is that it infects it doesn't cause a
viremia for the most part and viremia
means that it doesn't go into the blood
it stays in the lungs
and for some reason and i'll talk about
the reasons we've identified those
reasons
it infects the lungs and
it once it infects the lungs the human
immune response
has two main wings
wing one is the ancient wing of the
human immune response
which is called i am curious about the
human immune response so when this thing
attacks
i mean that's an interesting part of the
story not to interrupt but to dovetail
like what is the human immune response
the natural response to this
the first person who ever contracted
uh covid19 what what happens to the body
yeah so we need to know about that and
in fact i'm writing a big piece on this
so
so if you're interested you can read it
but there's a very
very good piece which was rather
neglected
i told janna there's too much news
in the world too much unimportant
nonsense news
and you need to read the news that's
important and not nonsense
the important news is a very very good
article in the new york times
about the kinetics of the cyrus cove too
in humans so very broadly speaking
very very broadly speaking there are
three wings of the human immune response
to the virus
everyone with me so far and i'm sorry if
i'm boring the hell out of you
okay i wouldn't let you do that the
oldest wing of the human immune response
which i study actually
is called the innate response it goes
all the way back to sponges
and ancient animals eutheria every
animal has it
and that is a response that does not
detect
any particular virus or any particular
bacterium
it detects patterns it detects
damage it detects danger so for instance
among other things it detects
i told you some viruses have rna
the presence of foreign rna in a cell
in particular cells will kick off this
response
and it's not specific to flu or sars
or this or that and it's called the
innate response because it is
the opposite of the other one that i'll
talk about this is already a
fantastically complicated system that is
evolved with the
uh theory that it will be attacked
at some point it needs to have an immune
system there is a war and i
uh even the concept of an immune system
is miraculous
that's right so so and and i was talking
about this piece that i just wrote in
cell
which talks about the word kampf
which elia mechanov was won the nobel
prize
the original vaccinators right he's one
of the digital vaccinators right
wrote about the word he said that we are
always
in kampf um
always at war with another pathogen
because
everyone's at war we are war with each
other because it's a war for survival
anyway the innate immune response
its job is to detect danger
patterns and to recognize self and to
recognize self
and to make sure that self is protected
and it has no specificity for a
particular virus
it recognizes patterns of viruses
patterns made and bacteria
and sends out danger signals and then
kicks in the glamour so so
it's the it's it's the less glamorous
cousin
because we've studied it less and then
it kicks in the glamorous cousins
and the glamorous cousins are b cells
and t cells b
cells make antibodies and these
antibodies are specific to the virus
t cells make uh don't make antibodies
they go and detect cells that have been
infected
and kill those cells yeah they're the
glass they're the glamour queens
of the immune response
now what we know about pathological
science
cov2 and this is one trick up its sleeve
and it's an incredible trick is that for
some reason that we still don't fully
understand although we understand a
little bit of it
sars cove ii paralyzes
or diminishes or somehow screws with
that innate human response the innate
immune response
not the b and t cell response which it
does later
but it screws up the innate immune
response so what happens
we think now is that
for for genetic reasons or for other
reasons
people who don't mount a strong enough
innate human response the danger signal
to cyrus ii basically
allow the virus to replicate and
replicate and replicate in cells
when you get the infection and then the
bnt
cells come in and say my god there
is a crisis here
and then what happens as a result of
that is this
is the b and t cells come in and say
this factory is on fire let's put this
factory out by
dousing it with everything we have
put anti you know put the
every anti-fire equipment that we have
and blast it on the lungs
and the problem is that that is
pathological so is that what's that's
what's causing
some of the the body itself is causing
something exactly right
and we just figured it out we figured it
out last week basically that's
it was extraor it's an extraordinary
story
and that's one we that there are other
tricks that sars has up its leave
but that is a main trick which is that
unlike other viruses sars cove
two the trick that cyroscov2 has
up its sleeve is it doesn't cause
viremia which is
spread of virus in the blood but rather
it goes into the lungs and in some
patients not in many patients
for reasons that we understand somewhat
and we don't understand otherwise
cyrus cove too blunts
the innate human response the one that
the ancient one
and then what happens as a result of
that
is that the b and t cells which are the
glamour queens of the or glamour kings
of the
human immune response say oh my god the
factory's on fire
put you know anti-retardant on it
and that anti-retardant is essentially
a bad thing because you get itself toxic
so um a friend did want me to ask you
about um certain genetic
predispositions to being vulnerable to
this particular disease
and and one of them being quite obvious
things like blood type
and and have you followed the arguments
that
o is protective and a is more vulnerable
what do you think about
those theories do you believe that so i
think there's some evidence for it but
those are very
minor pieces of the story because it
does seem to have a pretty huge range
in terms of those very minor pieces of
the story
the major pieces of the story and
they're coming out right now
has to do with genes that control the
innate
human response there there were two
dutch siblings both young both men
who were 27 and 21
very young not twins but siblings
who both had terrible coveted died
from coward and the question was why on
earth were these two dutch siblings
so badly affected so they did genetic
sequencing
and in both cases and this is what's
important
the genes that were problematic or the
genes that were mutated
by chance were genes that have to do
with the innate human immune response
not the b cell response not the t cell
response
but the innate human response that's one
extremely strong piece of evidence
the second piece of evidence which is
even stronger
and this is just one of the most amazing
stories in science
it came out in science magazine work by
done by john casanova at the rockefeller
some people have especially men
actually disproportionately men for
reasons we don't understand
have an autoimmune disease which is
really undiscovered no one knew about it
before because we've never looked before
they have an autoimmune disease that
blunts
their innate immune response
they have antibodies that they've made
auto antibodies just like you have
antibodies in multiple sclerosis or
lupus
against factors of the immune response
and those people are the ones that are
disproportionately affected by coving
so here's the crazy thing about it
and the numbers are not small 10 12
of patients with severe covid and even
up to 20
of patients with severe curvid have auto
antibodies autoimmune responses
against the immune against immune
responses so
what i'm trying to say is that 10 to 20
percent of covid
may be an autoimmune disease which no
one has ever
thought about before the reason i'm
saying this is that
maybe that's true for influenza maybe
that's true
we haven't really are we going to so
deeply
at a virus in this way we've never ever
looked
well even just the fact that we just
listed a bunch of
pandemics or were at least
viral outbreaks from hiv ebola
mers cyrus and none have elicited
this kind of reaction
you know societally let alone medically
and if you even if hiv was was was first
diagnosed in the us i think in
1981 but but it's suspected to have
emerged
in the early part of the 20th century
right so this is really interesting that
that that we don't the diseases were not
they're not
brand new this is called covid
19 because not because it was the 19th
that was discovered but because it was
the year
that that they recognized it but there
are a lot of coronaviruses
a lot and and and sarah's covid one
cove one is another example of a
coronavirus
most of them are harmless except for
stars so but the interesting thing is
the again not to go back to this but the
crossing of the species barrier where
hiv
ebola mers so hiv is thought to have
come from other primates
um ebola probably other primates um
mers camels possibly but there's a lot
of reservoirs in pigs and bats
avian flu swine flu is probably also an
avian flu
um this this back and forth between us
and other species and one of the things
i want to ask about is that you know
2020 has been a hell of a year
there are fires breaking out in
california
australia was devastated by fires in the
past couple of years and
and is there a relationship
between coexisting
with other animals uh climate change
and that is making
these diseases either
uh more readily transmissible or
um more aggressive or that we're giving
it back yeah
it's a very important question the
answer is there's no way to
prove it right it's this is a thought
experiment
um but there are giant
there are giant duck farms pig farms
and giant uh reservoirs
ducks and pigs where usually the flu
originates
[Music]
we know about the zoonotic infections
that originate
in the case of ebola
[Music]
i am concerned like deeply concerned
that um cyrus cove
ii may have been a bl3 leak
what do you mean by that may have been a
lab leak so that that was going around
that in wuhan
i know for a while i thought it was just
complete nonsense
but then i thought to myself
the main um laboratory
where coronaviruses are studied
happens to be coincidentally in
in the city where there's been a leak
oh no i shouldn't say leak where there
was an infection an infection
with chronovirus and our
racist um presumptions
are people are eating bats but if you
ask people
in wuhan they say we don't eat bats
then there was pangolins for a while and
they were like there were no pangolins
and so um i
because it was ascribed to have
originated in a wet market
that's right fair enough and i could be
completely wrong
and um but
but it would just it's just a little
weird that the
main lab that in the entire world
that studies coronaviruses and collects
them
from bat caves that are thousands of
miles away by the way from
one happens to be the same city
and all the specimens have now been
destroyed we can't go backwards etc
but but it it just
sort of defies belief and now i'm i'm
going to be imprisoned or something
well i mean there is this
idea of the way things permute and
in some sense like ecology and like
climate change some of it is incidental
and some of it is intentional
um so i don't think it's intentional i
don't think that you know for sure
for sure but i mean some of it is like
human manipulation
no i think i think we're doing i think
we are
living in closer and closer proximity to
animals because of ecology because of
climate change
because of deforestation because we are
claiming land
that we should not be claiming and
zoonotic viruses
are emerging as meaning crossing the
species barrier yeah sorry crossing the
species barrier
and we have no immunity against them
because we haven't experienced them
so do you think it's an unusual run that
in this
fairly young century we've had so many
outbreaks
oh i don't think it's unusual i think
it's a consequence of of climate change
i think it's a consequence of
of breaching barriers that we should if
we look at the devastation of the amazon
should we be surprised if new jersey
is far from right now no no no far from
it in fact i mean one of the things that
i think that you know one of the lessons
of sars
is is is in fact a climate change lesson
i think joe biden said it
he talked about it once he should talk
about it more
which is to say that the more we you
know we need to live
we need to learn to live within limits
there are forests there are animals and
forests
that have learned for centuries evolved
for centuries millennia
to live with viruses and
and you know why just remind yourself
what what's an advantage to a virus
a virus doesn't want to kill you right
evolutionary speaking you know you're a
mathematician yeah right it brings out
if it kills you
it's a terrible thing if it needs you to
replicate then showing you
isn't a very good idea that's right so
the viruses in humans
that have been the most successful are
viruses that have co-evolved with humans
for
millennia so epstein-barr virus
right so i would say in this audience
i would say about 80 percent of us carry
epstein-barr virus
do you know it no
you do you communicate it with to your
partner your
sibling whoever it might be yes
cytomegalovirus
herpes simplex virus you know all the
herpes
you know chickenpox right these are
extraordinarily successful viruses
they don't kill you they replicate and
they move on
and the last thing in fact if you were a
virus
is that a virus would want to kill you
the problem with the zoonotic viruses
is that we're not adapted to them right
so they just landed on you and didn't
they
just they went to town they they go to
town right
and you're dead and you're dead and
that's not what what a virus that
viruses want to do that
it wants to maintain itself in you and
move on to another person so i do i do
want to ask about
the realism of a vaccine i mean the the
we've never had a vaccine turned around
so quickly
as we're trying to do of course
technologically and and scientifically
we weren't as
advanced but the shortest turnaround i
believe for a vaccine is about four
years
from measles measles and was it mumps
okay it began with an m and so
here we are trying to devise a vaccine
and you know vaccines are complicated
they use
sometimes like viruses i mean you you
detail this in a
really narrative and engaging way
in your new yorker articles about the
first people who realized oh you know if
i put a little bit
of this if i grind up this scab and i
and i and i put it in an open wound in a
child i will
actually inoculate them i will kick
start
their immune responses and that's a
pretty dangerous game
that's right and and and it has to be
done
very cautiously and very correctly so
how do you feel about this
flat out race for a vaccine look we have
no choice
we have no choice i mean you know we
need to have a vaccine
because there's no other public health
strategy that we have
aside from vaccinating people
vaccinations like the flu do you think
it will be like
a vaccine the way that polio was an
incredibly effective vaccine or do you
think it will be like flu where it's a
well chances are it will be an effective
vaccine as i said the
the tricks that that cyrus go through
has its upper
upper sleeve are
not as bad as the tricks that hiv and
flu have i told you about the tricks
right so hiv
flu has this you know mixing
socks trick which is very tough because
we don't know which socks i didn't
realize that about hiv
until we spoke that i didn't realize
that about hiv until we spoke that it
has so many mutations in itself that's
right so the problem with hiv
is that it's very mutable it's flexible
and it changes from person to person
and it's mutable and and the dominant
parts that you would direct the vaccine
to
can change um as far as we can tell
the dominant part i mean and the only
way we'll know is when we have a vaccine
right there's no it's an experimental
problem as far as we know the binding
domain
that that the thing that
cyroscov2 uses to latch onto a cell
seems to not have changed very much in
humans
now when we we we've never applied a
so-called pressure
which would be the vaccine um to see if
to see if it will start changing and if
we needed
what might be called a dual vaccine in
which we
apply the pressure but we also go from
the side and apply
dual pressure but we need a vaccine so
these are the newest kind of vaccines
we've made
um usually the way we've made vaccines
in the past
is by taking a virus and either killing
it
using formaldehyde and injecting that
formaldehyde killed virus to elicit a
human
immune response um
so that's called a a you know a dead
killed virus
vaccine or we've taken a virus
and cultivated it in other cells
like egg cells or something until it
becomes a weakened version of the virus
so that's called a
live attenuated virus vaccine
both of which are successful all of
these vaccines that are coming out
are not that except for the vaccine in
china which is a
dead killed virus vaccine the vaccines
that are coming out from the united
states the pfizer the moderna the
astrazeneca etc are vaccines in which
we're taking
either the virus and a piece of the dna
of the virus
and putting it into another virus a
harmless virus
those would be the adenoviral vaccines
that's the
chad ox vaccines so when you when you
hear about the chad ox vaccine
from oxford the astrozenica vaccine
chad ox stands for chimpanzee adeno
vaccine so chad ox vaccine right
oxford chimpanzee add no oxford vaccine
so that's one set the moderna and the
fire and the
pfizer vaccine don't even use any virus
they just use dna they just use rna rna
right because it's an rna and they
inject you with the rna
hoping to elicit an immune response so
i'm i'm conscious that i want to open
it up uh to to billions of questions
but one of the things i kind of want to
know
and you and i have spoken about this
before here in pioneerics and other
times is
where's crispr in all of this where are
stem cells and all this so
sir crispr being the bacteria
has this innate
vaccination card that it keeps using
using
uh the dna of the virus that has
infected it
it puts the virus dna back into its own
dna so it can send it to its offspring
so all of its offspring has this
vaccination card and is inoculated
against this
um virus we don't have that which is
kind of amazing it's a brilliant it's
unbelievable that that bacteria do this
crispr has played a major role
i mean i spoke to jennifer dowden about
it who just won the nobel prize
wondering
overpriced yeah and is a close friend um
crispr has been a useful tool to
understand chronoviruses
but as far as vaccination strategies
it's not really been
so we can't do that we can't we can't
send a crisper
mechanism into the human genome to edit
our
own genome not have that vaccination
not so simply and we just
we just you know we just haven't there's
no simple way i mean
vaccination is an old idea you know it's
you know taking a scab from someone and
putting it into someone else
crispr is a new tool that allows us to
explore biology
but it's not a vaccination strategy per
se so
i don't see crispr playing in mma it
plays a major role in understanding how
the virus works
and that itself as a secondary effect
can help us understand how vaccination
works but crispr itself i don't think is
going to be the major tool for
vaccination
so i guess one of the things i want to
ask you before you
open it up to everybody else is um
is this some people have said things
like oh we're going to have a
coronavirus
pandemic plague once every 10 years and
is that something even if we vaccinate
against this coronavirus and we get past
this
and we all think oh we're free and our
masks are off are we just waiting a few
more years before the next one
well there are two questions there one
is
a natural experiment that we have to go
through which is to say
is the coronavirus is this coronary
virus going to mutate
once we put a vaccination pressure on it
we don't know the answer to that
we'll find out sadly
the second thing is that most
coronaviruses as we know
are not that bad um
sars mers and stars goes to a side
i mean they had higher fatality rates
but yeah they were less
contagious that's right they were less
contagious and they were
they didn't have that pre-symptomatic
asymptomatic carrier problem
so if you ask me will there be
more plagues in the future i would say
yes there will be more plagues in the
future we are deforesting
we are moving to zoonotic spaces we are
cultivating animals we're eating meat
way too much
um we are
you know we should be readjusting
to the realities in a larger scale this
is not going to happen tomorrow
but we're eating way too much meat we
are cultivating way too much
we are mono cultivating way too much
to be able there's less genetic
diversity
and if there's less genetic diversity
there's less resistance to
this less natural resistance to various
viruses and bacteria and we give it back
to the animals and then we give it back
to them
yeah right and because we're feeding
animals antibiotics
these antibiotics create resistance i
mean we are in a bad
cycle and we need to break that cycle um
and if we don't break that cycle what
happens as a result of that
is that we get plagues
you know and when you say the plague i
mean massive
i mean this is 43 plus million people
it is 25
unemployed in certain places right you
know economies
i mean this is not a this is not a joke
this is no joke this is no joke so this
is a global
crisis so do you think that some of
these so
social changes are going to be permanent
so for example so i mean you know if the
cdc says
december between think and hope
so so i hope that they i hope that this
is a warning against
monoculture i hope this is a warning
against
you know eating bad eating habits
bad consumption habits you know
bad deforestation habits potentially
climate change
all of which are linked they're linked
by
look at the countries that did the worst
in containing it they have
basically despots in power right like if
you look at
other places they contained it much more
efficiently and they're similarly places
that have a greater respect
for their natural ecologies um
well i i would prefer it if
the way to contain a plague was not to
have a despot
and no but they failed at containing the
plague that's what i'm saying
like brazilian
fair enough you know and so you know i i
would prefer it if we contain the plague
like new zealand new zealand is a good
example it's a wonderful example
it's a wonderful day well my daughters
want to move there so um
uh well so you know and germany
maybe if there may be a second wave i
don't know
you know i have to say that the whether
despots are not i mean you know despots
not despots these are just minor blips
in the
um scenario as it were
the really major blips in this scenario
are are we
moving in the wrong direction
kind of globally are we invading spaces
are we doing monoculture
are we doing um should we be doing
things should we should we have a
surveillance system
which is which is internationally funded
which is not a paralyzed effect
forecasting
forecasting containing i mean so
i mean look if you want everyone has a
hindsight 2020.
but first of all when trump calls it the
china virus
he's lying because most of the
infections in the united states
in new york in most of the northeast
came from europe didn't come from china
and they came from italy and spain which
then came from china
right so the idea that
the idea that we have a very global
society which is highly mobile
people are moving around we need a
surveillance system
like we have for the flu that tracks and
finds out whether
things are moving with and when to close
borders down
i mean i flew into laguardia from
croatia which by the way is very safe
because you have to
you can only enter croatia with a
negative pcr test
and i just walked no
who's jfk not laguardia walked off my
flight picked up my bags and left
i could have flown in from brazil i
could have flown in from
god knows where and spread virus
everywhere so we have
the wealthiest country in the world has
one of the worst contact tracing systems
it has one of the worst vaccine
distribution systems
we need to invest in all of this before
i get into the questions can we just
take a minute to thank sid for joining
us
tonight in this very modest private
event
[Applause]
and look janna new york
is is rising again despite what
trump says cheap gossip yeah cheap
gossip it's rising again
we will be back we are coming back we
will be back
we will go to the opera again we will
do we will wear masks
we have one this is one of the safest
cities
in the world because we
listen we phased we
this end so let's keep that up don't
defy rules don't congregate without
masks
you know be conscious if you are
i mean come on i mean you know this is
we are in a safe zone
keep it that way okay
and we just need
i think we need to have the new york
will
and you know and the survival instincts
we went through this in the 80s we've
gone through this in the 90s
we will go through this again in the
2020s we will come back
don't worry i love it
for new york um i'm gonna consolidate
some of these questions
um one of the questions is
how useful would it be if we had daily
or
weekly individual testing uh
even if less reliable and i think that's
almost a second question
because the the so we know that
reliability is it's an important
question
for the for the governance panel we did
a simulation
and what's funny about is that the
simulation um janna you like this
because
the simulation works out basically the
same answer as a back of the envelope
calculation
um so it depends on what your goals are
right if your goal is to open a business
and if your goal is to open a restaurant
if your goal is to open
a school probably
twice a week testing with a sensitivity
in and specific specificity in the 90
range is probably good enough but what
about the fact that the test
takes three days to come so no it does
not this is a this is a complete
misnomer
so um tests can come back if you
do it well the a good pcr test which is
highly sensitive
can come back in 24 hours and there are
two tests that are coming out
which will come back in two hours or to
three hours
so you can sit in the playground enjoy
yourself
and once you're ready you can go and
attend your classes etc etc
so we are having a discussion with the
governor
to open up and again the amount of money
that it would cost the city
to do it this way if you wanted to open
up businesses
is actually kind of trivial if you pool
samples so if you pull 10 people to a
sample
and then you re-test the person in that
sample if you retest that
we i calculated the amount it's on the
order of
30 million dollars a month
we are bleeding 30 million dollars and
lost revenue yeah
so um 30 million dollars a month is
trivial we could do it it would mean
mobilizing the major universe can we do
it state by state
can we just as new york state decide
with governor cuomo and we would need a
pilot
we would need a pilot that would show
that was successful
would there be leaks yes some people
would get infected
would that be worth it yes so here's
another question
um is there any evidence that covid19
virus was
engineered i mean you mentioned that it
may have been lead from a laboratory
which is not impossible but engineered
as a next level yeah i don't
so i've looked at the sequence i've
looked at the sequence carefully
many times over i don't think it's
engineered
and what what do you think about because
it looks a lot like
sara's cove one even though it's my
understanding maybe you can correct this
that they don't it's not a direct
descendant of
no they're but they know they're
descendants yeah they have a far
away past year do all corona viruses
have passed
are they all yeah they're all part of a
big family they have as i said they're
coronary viruses because they
have this crown like protein structure
a protein lipid envelope
but they are not related some of them
are quite harmless actually
um so i'm having trouble reading your
writing i'm sorry friend
[Laughter]
there are questions about vulnerability
why um pre-existing conditions for
instance
things like autoimmune disease um
cancerous histories uh
why do they make somebody quite so
vulnerable to this particular disease we
talked about this so they're
it's part of the autoimmune well what
you talked about is that
there are two levels of vulnerability to
the virus
one is the people who
don't seem to have any pre-existing
conditions
but when you look at those people many
of them
have this problem with innate immunity
you would almost wonder if you had an
autoimmune disease if you'd be better
off
um no one's really looked at that
properly but i suppose you could look at
that but
i mean it has happened that there are
diseases that target the young and the
healthy precisely because their immune
systems are so aggressive
right and there are many such diseases
right yeah so
um so so as i said there are three
levels the second level
is that if your innate immune system is
intact but you don't get
proper b cells or t cells to the virus
then you can also be susceptible so
there are really two or three levels
at which you can become susceptible to
the particularly susceptible to the
virus so i think we've been going for a
bit over an
hour and i and i want to be sensitive to
to people's ability to sit still with
masks on
it's an added challenge um
but i i did want to ask
um what is your most
what do your optimistic moments sound
like
i mean what is that i mean clearly we're
not going to have a vaccine incredibly
quickly
we're not going to be sure about the
efficacy of a vaccine it may or may not
it may be like flu
50 it might be like something like
50 is another very good very good number
by the way it's a good number but it's
but it's it's it's not what people
imagine
naively when they hear the word vaccine
yeah i understand they hear
cure right and to say you you're 50
protected is kind of a reality check it
means we're still wearing masks
we're still social distancing you know
that these these changes may well be
be permanent i mean i can imagine if the
cdc discovers a new coronavirus
this december 2020 unlike 2019
they're going to be telling everybody to
put masks on right away
we're not going to have the same
and what do you think about the fact
that they have it oh gosh
i mean i think if we had vac if we had
masked ourselves
relatively sealed our borders done
pcr testing and contact racing
i'm sad to say we may have prevented a
hundred thousand deaths
i mean that is huge right and the fact
that we're looking at a million plus
people
who have died due to this disease that's
mitigated
right it could have been significantly
worse than that
and it also could have been
significantly better than that no i
agree i mean i think you know i think
i think it points to a profound
lack of leadership is there anything you
want to say in that regard since we're
airing this on thursday before the
election
vote
[Laughter]
so um just to pursue
well so what is the optimistic scenario
yeah this is an optimistic scenario
exactly the optimistic scenario
is that this is not a highly immutable
virus
that we have a reasonable set it won't
be one
candidates in january or february or
march
of next year of vaccines
that these vaccines will produce 60
70 percent protection the virus will not
mutate against the
against the vaccine and we will take
two to two and a half years to vaccinate
everyone
and so does that mean for two and two
and a half years
we're globally we're doing this no
i think we will slowly relax in phases
i think we will remain masked um
i think so you better buy some of andrea
lauer's fabulous
masks for sale at the front there yeah
um i think we will remain masked for a
little bit and then we will slowly ease
up those restrictions
um i personally am in favor of vaccine
passports
if you have if you've been vaccinated
and
with an effective vaccine i think you
should be
allowed to go into places where people
who have not been vaccinated
are not allowed to go into because these
are private businesses i mean that's
what people did with the smallpox right
if you so listen
i have to get a flu vaccine i have to
i'm a physician
if i don't get a flu vaccine i'm i can't
come to work
um so i don't see why
a private business could make a decision
whatever it might be to say look you
know if you if you know if you don't
have a vaccine passport
you can't come you can't come into our
store right um
and maybe you can come into our store
with a mask but you know you'll be only
allowed in on fridays when
other people who are crazy like you um
are allowed in and you can go infect
each other um but it's kind of it's kind
of a variant on casual friday
exactly tgi
v viral
thank god it's virus day
um sid i could speak to you all night
and um i really hope you'll join us in
the garden afterwards and i
i just want to thank you so much for
coming out
and this is such an important topic it
means so much to us
well it's a very important topic i think
we should
continue talking about it i think again
i'm optimistic january february march i
think
frontline healthcare workers will be
front up
teachers will be next
you know firefighters
paramedics where are mathematicians in
on this
i think are a little lower in me yeah
that's what i was afraid of
but we'll get you one and you'll you'll
be fine
but let's watch the data i hope it's
good i can't tell you anyway
i don't know we're looking every day
and you know we'll see what happens well
thank you sid thank you for your writing
thank you for your contribution to the
the state program to
bring bring the state and the city back
online and thanks so much for joining us
thank you we're trying thank you sir
you